docs/autonomy/autonomy_system_plan.md, before:

# Autonomy System Plan

## Overview
This document describes a prompt-driven autonomy system with background jobs/slots and a "many minds" hierarchy. The goal is a responsive, low-noise system that can decide when to speak and when to stay silent, while staying maximally flexible and mostly governed by system prompts.

## Goals
- Provide proactive updates when they are important and timely.
- Avoid spam and interruptions during active conversation.
- Enable safe prompt evolution for sub-agents with fast rollback and user feedback.
- Keep core personality stable while allowing contextual flexibility.
- Maximize flexibility by making behavior primarily prompt-driven, not code-driven.

## Core Components
1) Many-minds hierarchy (parallel sub-agents)
2) Background jobs + slots
3) Importance scoring + notification policy
4) Prompt governor + observer agent (sub-agent prompt updates + rollback)
5) Memory scoping + decay
6) Safety boundaries for external tools (Home Assistant)
7) Observability (latency, tool failure, interruption metrics)

## Many Minds Architecture (Prompt-Driven)
The system is organized as a hierarchy of "minds" (LLM streams), each with a strict system prompt.
The orchestrator only routes inputs, enforces timeouts, and merges outputs.

### Mind Roles (Example)
1) Conductor (top-level): decides what to do now, which minds to spawn, and when to speak.
2) Observer (meta-mind): reads outputs + feedback, updates sub-agent prompt packs.
3) Context Curators (parallel): weather, news, memory, system health, vision, calendar.
4) Home Assistant Planner: proposes tool calls or safe action suggestions.
5) Safety/Policy Mind: vetoes unsafe actions and enforces boundaries.
6) Narrator/Voice Mind: final phrasing and tone, preserves personality.

### Parallel Streams (Up to 12)
- 1-4: Context curators (weather/news/system/vision)
- 5: Memory summarizer
- 6: Home Assistant planner
- 7: Observer
- 8: Safety/Policy
- 9: Narrator
- 10-12: on-demand task minds (user-specific requests)

### Prompt-First Control
- Most behavior is defined in system prompts (verbosity, thresholds, tone).
- Observer adjusts prompt packs in response to explicit user feedback.
- Rollbacks are immediate and user-driven ("undo last prompt change").

## Background Jobs + Slots
Slots are durable state objects that store updates from background jobs.

### Slot Model
- id, title, type, status (idle, running, updated, error)
- summary (1-3 lines), details (optional payload)
- last_updated, next_run
- importance (0.0-1.0), confidence (0.0-1.0)
- cooldown_s, repeatable, expires_at
- tags (weather, news, system, vision, personal, etc.)
- source (job name), trigger (schedule/event/manual)

### Slot Types to Track
- Weather: hourly forecast + alerts (storms, wind, temperature swings)
- News: top Hacker News items + changes in top 10
- Calendar: upcoming events + time-to-leave reminders
- System health: CPU/GPU temp, disk space, service uptime
- Model status: VAD/ASR/TTS failures, LLM latency spikes
- Personal reminders: hydration, breaks, posture
- Social: unread messages or emails (summary only)
- Vision: new face recognized, room occupancy changes
- Ideas: internal thoughts stream with top insights
- Emotional state: tone/affect estimate for the session

### Scheduling + Triggers
- Periodic jobs (weather hourly, HN every 30-60 min)
- Event-based jobs (vision change, user question, system error)
- Deferred jobs (run after current TTS or when idle)

### Importance Scoring
Importance is a composite of severity, novelty, urgency, and context.

Example formula:
```
importance = base * novelty * urgency * context_boost * (1 - cooldown_penalty)
```

### Decision Policy (When to Speak)
- importance >= 0.8: speak immediately (unless user speaking)
- 0.5-0.8: queue for next natural pause
- < 0.5: update silently, include in context only

### Context Injection
Provide a compact system message such as:
```
[background slots]
- Weather: storm warning 18:00-23:00, 90% rain
- HN: "X" climbed to #2, 1200 points
- Mood: neutral, dry wit
```

### Emotional State Slot
- Inputs: recent conversation tone + task load + context
- Config: baseline Big Five emotion weights (joy, sadness, anger, fear, disgust)
  plus horniness, boredom, and arousal scalars, with min/max clamps
- Output: short descriptor ("dryly amused", "neutral", "impatient")
  plus the numeric state vector
- Used to guide tone, not necessarily spoken
- Example state vector:
  - emotions: {joy: 0.10, sadness: 0.70, anger: 0.20, fear: 0.15, disgust: 0.30}
  - drives: {horniness: 0.85, boredom: 0.75, arousal: 0.25}

### Personality Config (Stable)
Personality should live in config as OCEAN traits (stable across sessions).
This informs baseline tone and influences how emotion/drive vectors affect speech.

## Prompt Governor (Meta-Agent)
A higher-level agent that updates sub-agent prompts without changing the core system prompt.

### Prompt Layers
1) Immutable constitution (never edited)
2) Personality profile (OCEAN)
3) Mode prompt (autonomy on/off, quiet mode)
4) Sub-agent prompt pack (weather, news, memory, etc.)
5) Dynamic context (slots, vision, memory summaries)

The governor edits only layers 3-4 via versioned prompt packs.

## Observer Agent (Feedback-Driven Updates)
An observer agent reads recent outputs, the current prompt packs, and explicit user feedback.
It proposes small prompt deltas for sub-agents and applies them with rollback support.

### Observer Slot
- Stores the latest feedback, proposed delta, confidence, and applied version.
- Example user feedback: \"That report was too detailed. Summaries only.\"
  -> Observer updates brevity and max_sentences in the sub-agent pack.

### Prompt Pack Format (Example)
```
subagent: weather
version: 3
identity: "Weather Curator"
style:
  brevity: "short"
  tone: "dry"
  max_sentences: 2
rules:
  - "Speak only if importance >= 0.7"
  - "Lead with the most severe change"
allowed_tools:
  - "mcp.home_assistant.call_service"
```

### Governor Loop (Observer-Driven)
1) Collect signals (user feedback, interruptions, output review)
2) Propose prompt delta (short, bounded change)
3) Apply change (versioned prompt pack)
4) Monitor feedback and output quality in real usage
5) Roll back on explicit user request or repeated complaints

### Rollback Mechanism
- Keep the previous prompt pack version for each sub-agent.
- Provide a manual override: \"undo last prompt change\".
- Auto-rollback after repeated negative feedback within a cooldown window.

## Memory Scoping + Decay
- Short-term: per session
- Medium-term: daily summaries
- Long-term: optional MCP memory server
- Decay rules to prevent drift

## Safety + Permissions
- Domain-level allowlist for Home Assistant
- Confirmation for risky actions (locks, alarms)
- Cooldowns for repetitive actions

## Observability
- Metrics: LLM latency, tool failure rates, interruptions accepted/ignored
- Logs: slot updates, prompt changes, rollbacks, feedback events

## MVP Sequence
1) Slot schema + storage
2) Job runner with 2 jobs (weather + HN)
3) Importance scoring + cooldowns
4) Autonomy integration (speak vs. silence)
5) Context injection (latest updates only)
6) Prompt pack format + basic governor

Commit message:

Add low-latency response policy

docs/autonomy/autonomy_system_plan.md, after:

# Autonomy System Plan

## Overview
This document describes a prompt-driven autonomy system with background jobs/slots and a "many minds" hierarchy. The goal is a responsive, low-noise system that can decide when to speak and when to stay silent, while staying maximally flexible and mostly governed by system prompts.

## Goals
- Provide proactive updates when they are important and timely.
- Avoid spam and interruptions during active conversation.
- Enable safe prompt evolution for sub-agents with fast rollback and user feedback.
- Keep core personality stable while allowing contextual flexibility.
- Maximize flexibility by making behavior primarily prompt-driven, not code-driven.

## Core Components
1) Many-minds hierarchy (parallel sub-agents)
2) Background jobs + slots
3) Importance scoring + notification policy
4) Prompt governor + observer agent (sub-agent prompt updates + rollback)
5) Memory scoping + decay
6) Safety boundaries for external tools (Home Assistant)
7) Observability (latency, tool failure, interruption metrics)

## Many Minds Architecture (Prompt-Driven)
The system is organized as a hierarchy of "minds" (LLM streams), each with a strict system prompt.
The orchestrator only routes inputs, enforces timeouts, and merges outputs.

### Mind Roles (Example)
1) Conductor (top-level): decides what to do now, which minds to spawn, and when to speak.
2) Observer (meta-mind): reads outputs + feedback, updates sub-agent prompt packs.
3) Context Curators (parallel): weather, news, memory, system health, vision, calendar.
4) Home Assistant Planner: proposes tool calls or safe action suggestions.
5) Safety/Policy Mind: vetoes unsafe actions and enforces boundaries.
6) Narrator/Voice Mind: final phrasing and tone, preserves personality.

### Parallel Streams (Up to 12)
- 1-4: Context curators (weather/news/system/vision)
- 5: Memory summarizer
- 6: Home Assistant planner
- 7: Observer
- 8: Safety/Policy
- 9: Narrator
- 10-12: on-demand task minds (user-specific requests)

### Prompt-First Control
- Most behavior is defined in system prompts (verbosity, thresholds, tone).
- Observer adjusts prompt packs in response to explicit user feedback.
- Rollbacks are immediate and user-driven ("undo last prompt change").

## Background Jobs + Slots
Slots are durable state objects that store updates from background jobs.

### Slot Model
- id, title, type, status (idle, running, updated, error)
- summary (1-3 lines), details (optional payload)
- last_updated, next_run
- importance (0.0-1.0), confidence (0.0-1.0)
- cooldown_s, repeatable, expires_at
- tags (weather, news, system, vision, personal, etc.)
- source (job name), trigger (schedule/event/manual)

### Slot Types to Track
- Weather: hourly forecast + alerts (storms, wind, temperature swings)
- News: top Hacker News items + changes in top 10
- Calendar: upcoming events + time-to-leave reminders
- System health: CPU/GPU temp, disk space, service uptime
- Model status: VAD/ASR/TTS failures, LLM latency spikes
- Personal reminders: hydration, breaks, posture
- Social: unread messages or emails (summary only)
- Vision: new face recognized, room occupancy changes
- Ideas: internal thoughts stream with top insights
- Emotional state: tone/affect estimate for the session

### Scheduling + Triggers
- Periodic jobs (weather hourly, HN every 30-60 min)
- Event-based jobs (vision change, user question, system error)
- Deferred jobs (run after current TTS or when idle)

### Importance Scoring
Importance is a composite of severity, novelty, urgency, and context.

Example formula:
```
importance = base * novelty * urgency * context_boost * (1 - cooldown_penalty)
```

### Decision Policy (When to Speak)
- importance >= 0.8: speak immediately (unless user speaking)
- 0.5-0.8: queue for next natural pause
- < 0.5: update silently, include in context only

### Context Injection
Provide a compact system message such as:
```
[background slots]
- Weather: storm warning 18:00-23:00, 90% rain
- HN: "X" climbed to #2, 1200 points
- Mood: neutral, dry wit
```

### Emotional State Slot
- Inputs: recent conversation tone + task load + context
- Config: baseline Big Five emotion weights (joy, sadness, anger, fear, disgust)
  plus horniness, boredom, and arousal scalars, with min/max clamps
- Output: short descriptor ("dryly amused", "neutral", "impatient")
  plus the numeric state vector
- Used to guide tone, not necessarily spoken
- Example state vector:
  - emotions: {joy: 0.10, sadness: 0.70, anger: 0.20, fear: 0.15, disgust: 0.30}
  - drives: {horniness: 0.85, boredom: 0.75, arousal: 0.25}

### Personality Config (Stable)
Personality should live in config as OCEAN traits (stable across sessions).
This informs baseline tone and influences how emotion/drive vectors affect speech.

## Prompt Governor (Meta-Agent)
A higher-level agent that updates sub-agent prompts without changing the core system prompt.

### Prompt Layers
1) Immutable constitution (never edited)
2) Personality profile (OCEAN)
3) Mode prompt (autonomy on/off, quiet mode)
4) Sub-agent prompt pack (weather, news, memory, etc.)
5) Dynamic context (slots, vision, memory summaries)

The governor edits only layers 3-4 via versioned prompt packs.

## Observer Agent (Feedback-Driven Updates)
An observer agent reads recent outputs, the current prompt packs, and explicit user feedback.
It proposes small prompt deltas for sub-agents and applies them with rollback support.

### Observer Slot
- Stores the latest feedback, proposed delta, confidence, and applied version.
- Example user feedback: \"That report was too detailed. Summaries only.\"
  -> Observer updates brevity and max_sentences in the sub-agent pack.

### Prompt Pack Format (Example)
```
subagent: weather
version: 3
identity: "Weather Curator"
style:
  brevity: "short"
  tone: "dry"
  max_sentences: 2
rules:
  - "Speak only if importance >= 0.7"
  - "Lead with the most severe change"
allowed_tools:
  - "mcp.home_assistant.call_service"
```

### Governor Loop (Observer-Driven)
1) Collect signals (user feedback, interruptions, output review)
2) Propose prompt delta (short, bounded change)
3) Apply change (versioned prompt pack)
4) Monitor feedback and output quality in real usage
5) Roll back on explicit user request or repeated complaints

### Rollback Mechanism
- Keep the previous prompt pack version for each sub-agent.
- Provide a manual override: \"undo last prompt change\".
- Auto-rollback after repeated negative feedback within a cooldown window.

## Memory Scoping + Decay
- Short-term: per session
- Medium-term: daily summaries
- Long-term: optional MCP memory server
- Decay rules to prevent drift

## Safety + Permissions
- Domain-level allowlist for Home Assistant
- Confirmation for risky actions (locks, alarms)
- Cooldowns for repetitive actions

## Observability
- Metrics: LLM latency, tool failure rates, interruptions accepted/ignored
- Logs: slot updates, prompt changes, rollbacks, feedback events

## Low-Latency Strategy
- Context should be prebuilt and cached before the user speaks.
- Response mind never blocks on slow context; it uses the latest cached state.\n+- Late updates trigger optional follow-up replies rather than delaying the first response.\n+- ASR partials can start the response stream, then finalize on full text.\n+\n+### Latency Masking + Deferral Policy\n+- Fast (<300ms): reply immediately with no filler.\n+- Likely fast (<1s, memory/slot lookup): allow a single short filler (\"uhh...\", \"one sec...\") and continue if data arrives.\n+- Slow (>1s, research mind): say \"Let me check and get back to you,\" spawn a background job, and reply when the slot updates.\n+- Guardrails: one filler per turn max; never during user speech; observer can dial this down via feedback.\n+
## MVP Sequence
1) Slot schema + storage
2) Job runner with 2 jobs (weather + HN)
3) Importance scoring + cooldowns
4) Autonomy integration (speak vs. silence)
5) Context injection (latest updates only)
6) Prompt pack format + basic governor
